# PlscRP

R Code for data analysis as described in the manuscript 'Random Projection for fast and efficient multivariate correlation analysis of high-dimensional data: A new approach'

Date: 2016-03-09

Authors: Claudia Grellmann, Jane Neumann, Sebastian Bitzer, Peter Kovacs, Anke Tönjes, Lars T. Westlye, Ole A. Andreassen, Michael Stumvoll, Arno Villringer & Annette Horstmann

Implemented by: Claudia Grellmann

Requires: far, proxy

Description:
Partial Least Squares Correlation (PLSC) analyzes the association between any two sets of data X1 and X2 by building latent variables Z1 = X1 * W1 and Z2 = X2 * W2, such that at each step the covariance between the pair of latent variables Z1 and Z2 is maximized. It is, however, computationally extensive in applications involving large numbers of variables. We propose a new approach that incorporates Random Projection (RP) for dimensionality reduction into PLSC. We name our new method PLSC-RP.

The folder 'RP_phenotype' demonstrates how to use PLSC-RP in order to reduce the number of columns in X1 (the phenotype matrix in our application). The R Script containing all relevant data analysis steps is called 'RP_phenotype.R'. There are two example data sets given. The folder 'ExampleData_1000voxel' contains simulated fMRI data of 1,000 voxels ('X1.RData') and 50 candidate SNPs ('X2.RData'). The folder 'ExampleData_90000voxel' contains simulated fMRI data of 90,000 voxels (X1.RData) and 50 candidate SNPs (X2.RData). The ID of the causal voxel is saved as 'IDcausalX1.RData' and IDs of causal SNPs are saved as 'IDcausalX2.RData'. IDs of voxels collinear to the causal voxel (that is correlated to the causal voxel with r>=0.8) are saved as 'IDcollinearX1.RData'. For 'ExampleData_90000voxel' results are illustrated in the manuscript (Figure 1).

The folder 'RP_genotype' demonstrates how to use PLSC-RP in order to reduce the number of columns in X2 (the genotype matrix in our application). The R Script containing all relevant data analysis steps is called 'RP_genotype.R'. Unfortunately, we cannot provide the example data described in the manuscript since it contains real subject data.

The folder 'RP_phenotype_and_genotype' demonstrates how to use PLSC-RP in order to reduce both the number of columns in X1 (the phenotype matrix) and the number of columns in X2 (the genotype matrix). The R Script containing all relevant data analysis steps is called 'RP_phenotype_and_genotype.R'. There is one example data set given. The folder 'ExampleData_1000voxel_1000SNP' contains simulated fMRI data of 1,000 voxels ('X1.RData') and 1,000 SNPs ('X2.RData'). The ID of the causal voxel is saved as 'IDcausalX1.RData' and IDs of causal SNPs are saved as 'IDcausalX2.RData'. IDs of voxels collinear to the causal voxel are saved as 'IDcollinearX1.RData'.

All functions that are necessary to run the code provided in the R scripts are collected in the folder 'functions'.

The general structure of the R scripts is as follows. At first, the user has to indicate the filename of example data. The filename corresponds to the location where the example data set is saved. The user also indicates the filename to which results should be saved. The user needs to determine whether the random matrix created for RP should be orthogonalized using Gram-Schmidt algorithm. If yes, indicate 'orthonorm <- TRUE', if not, 'orthonorm <- FALSE'. The Gram-Schmidt algorithm is computationally expensive. Therefore we recommend to indicate 'orthonorm <- TRUE' only if the number of variables in X1 or X2 is moderate (e.g. for example data sets described in RP_phenotype and RP_phenotype_and_genotype). Otherwise, computational load might be extensive. The user needs to define a number of permutations. A high number of permutations yields more accurate results (as presented in the manuscript). However, for demonstration, a smaller number of permutations might be used in order to quickly get results. Lastly, the user has to indicate the filename of example data.

The R scripts are built such that the user does not need to edit anything after the comment: 'Start of R Script'. At first, all necessary functions are read in. Then, the example data is loaded and the input matrices are standardized columnwise. Subsequently, to perform PLSC-RP, the matrices X1 and/or X2 are transformed to low-dimensional subspace matrices by multiplication with (orthonormal) random matrices R1 and/or R2. The dimensionality of the low-dimensional subspace matrices is determined as suggested by the Menon theorem. The algorithm for computing the Menon lower bound is saved in the script 'Menon_lowerBound.R' located in folder 'functions'.

To run PLSC-RP, a permutation test is performed that yields the significance of the covariance between latent variables of a selected component. To reduce the total number of components, as many components are selected as necessary to explain at least 80% of variance. The algorithm for performing PLSC-RP is saved in the script 'PLSC.R' located in folder 'functions'. To define the causal component, the out-of-sample covariance is computed using 10-fold CV. The algorithm to compute the out-of-sample covariance is saved in the script 'Out_of_sample_cov.R' located in folder 'functions'. Using PLSC-RP, we obtain weights for the low dimensional subspaces of X1 and/or X2. To evaluate the contribution of each single variable in X1 and each single variable in X2, the weights are transformed back to the original space. Finally, the results of PLSC-RP are saved to a location determined by the user and weight profiles are plotted for visualization. Note that the profiles presented in the manuscript are usually zoomed in on a range representing causal variables. For the sake of completeness, in the R scripts we also show complete variable profiles. However, little can be concluded from the complete profiles.

To evaluated the performance of our new approach PLSC-RP, we also run traditional PLSC and compare the results of the two approaches. As for PLSC-RP, we run a permutation test, select as many components as necessary to explain at least 80% of variance, define the causal component by the out-of-sample covariance, save the results to a location determined by the user and plot variable weight profiles.

Finally, we compare the weight profiles of PLSC-RP to the weight profiles of PLSC using three similarity measures, Pearson correlation, the cosine measure and the extended Jaccard similarity. The algorithm for determining similarity is saved in the script 'Similarity.R' located in folder 'functions'.

Note that the results on the example data sets we provided in order to run the algorithms might vary slightly from the results described in the manuscript, e.g. in terms of the P-value of permutaion testing, the out-of-sample covariance for the causal component or the similarity coeffiecients for voxel and SNP weight profiles of PLSC-RP compared to traditional PLSC, since with each run of the R scripts a new random matrix is produced that is then used to transform the high-dimensional input matrices X1 and/or X2 to low dimensional spaces. Similarly, presented voxel and SNP weight profiles (Figure 1 to 4 in the mauscript) might appear slightly different.

